== Keybindings ==

Keybindings, as well as resolution and fullscreen options can be changed by
editing config.lua.

KEYPAD - movement
SPACE  - action
ESCAPE - game menu (help, save, quit, character info)

Use numpad with numlock off to move around, SPACE to activate, close or use
elevator. Non-passable features will also be activated by bumping into them.
SHIFT+move will do constant move until moving to a feature or enemy in sight.

.   - wait
g   - pickup (get)
u   - use item (also assign quickslots)
1-4 - use item in quickslot
f   - fire
r   - reload
d   - drop equipment piece
s   - switch to sidearm weapon
p   - switch to primary weapon
h   - switch to heavy weapon

l   - Look mode
F10 - Screenshot (png if graphical, txt in textmode)

TAB (while aiming) - cycle targets

== Common sidearms ==

M4A3 pistol -- Your standard pistol, low armor penetrating abilities but a
decent clip size, and it uses common 9mm ammo.

.44 Colt -- This one has more power behind it. The colt has decent armor
penetrating capabilities and also deals more damage, but ammo is harder to
find.

Sawed-off shotgun -- Needs to be reloaded after each shot. It has low armor
penetrating capabilites, but has high base damage.


== Common primary weapons ==

MP5 -- Your basic SMG. Fires 6 round bursts of 9mm ammo and has a clip of
30. Low armor penetration.

12g combat shotgun -- Pretty much the same as the sawed-off one, except
that this one has a 5 round clip, making it much more useful in a tight
combat situation. Low armor penetration.

M41-A pulse rifle -- The only non-heavy weapon with high armor penetrating
abilities. Has a clip of 99 M309 bullets and fires bursts of 5 rounds
and is generally good for killing anything. Though you should probably
use something else for the small fry to conserve ammo.


== Heavy weapons ==

No data.


== Grenades ==

Frag -- Your basic fragmentation grenade. Upon detonation it disperses
a large number of sharp fragments over a relatively large area. The
fragments severely hurt unarmored targets and also posses light armor
piercing capabilities, but are almost useless against heavily armored
targets.

Krak -- High explosive grenades with a small, focused explosion designed
to break through heavy and reinforced armor. The effective range is much
smaller than that of a fragmentation grenade, but the effect on anything
inside the area is all the more devestating. Best used against heavily
armored targets.

Inc -- High explosive grenade spreading flammable material. Great for 
escapes.

== Armor ==

Armor is your only protection against an alien's sharp claws, so you'll
want to make sure to wear one at all times. The most straight forward
gain from wearing armor is the damage reduction, which differs between
different kinds of armor.

The number behind the armor represents this damage reduction, e.g. "Armor
  : Flak armor [2]" means, that the flak armor has a damage reduction of 2,
which is more than a simple flack jacket has. In addition to protection,
armor can offer you better offensive capabilities by allowing you to equip,
and use, heavy weapons. The weakest armor with such a bonus is the
gyro-stabilizer. It offers no damage reduction but instead grants you the
ability to equip and fire a heavy weapon. The choice between taking less
damage and dealing more is tough, and it's all yours. Choose wisely, Marine!

== Getting started ==

AliensRL towers have quite a huge space to explore. However, you are not
expected (or even advised!) to explore everything. You'll quickly run out
of ammo if you try to kill everything in your path. Instead, you should
stock up on ammo and supplies, and when possible try to move to higher 
levels. Once ready you should try to make a run for the top of the main
Tower and kill the queen. 

Read the tips during the level generation. Conserve ammo. Remember that
armored targets (like workers or elite's) are almost unaffected by weak
ammo (like 9mm or frag grenades). Remember that shooting an alien in the
face is a lot more effective than from a distance (don't let them kill you
though!). And above all...

Good luck!

... you're going to need it!
